RLP-994/release-0.1.0-docs (#206)
rsksmart/lumino: docs/1.0.0/install_ubuntu.md

```shell script
sudo apt update
sudo apt install software-properties-common
```

Add deadsnakes PPA to your sources list:

```shell script
sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa
```

Once the repository is enabled, install Python 3.7:

```shell script
sudo apt install python3.7
```

### 2. Install Python 3.7-dev

If you didn't update your local APT repository, execute:

```shell script
sudo apt update
```

To install python 3.7-dev run the following command:

```shell script
sudo apt-get install libpq-dev python3.7-dev
```

### 3. Install `pip`

If you didn't update your local APT repository, execute:

```shell script
sudo apt update
```

Install `pip3` by executing:

```shell script
sudo apt-get install python3-pip
```

### 4. Install `virtualenv`

If you didn't update your local APT repository, execute:

```shell script
sudo apt update
```

Install `virtualenv` by executing:

```shell script
sudo apt-get install virtualenv
```

### 5. Install Lumino Invoicing dependencies

Lumino includes a billing that is based on the Lighting Network invoicing feature. In order to install Lumino, the following dependencies are required:

```shell script

> sudo apt install libsecp256k1-dev
> 
> sudo apt-get install libssl-dev build-essential automake pkg-config libtool libffi-dev libgmp-dev libyaml-cpp-dev

Reviewer: Why do we use one apt install with one package and another one with multiple? 
```suggestion

sudo apt install libsecp256k1-dev libssl-dev build-essential automake pkg-config libtool libffi-dev libgmp-dev libyaml-cpp-dev
```

Let's call your local path in which the code resides `$RIF_LUMINO_PATH`.

### 2. Create an environment

You'll only need to create a python virtual environment for RIF Lumino once. 

Execute the following command:

```shell script
virtualenv -p <PATH_TO_PYTHON3.7> clientEnv
```

**Note:**

Replace `<PATH_TO_PYTHON3.7>` with the path where Python3.7 is installed in your system. In the case of Ubuntu OS, this is usually `/usr/bin/python3.7`.

You can verify your path to Python3.7 by executing:
```shell script
which python3
```

### 3. Activate the environment
Activate the python virtual environment by executing the following command:

```shell script
source clientEnv/bin/activate
```

Check if the Python version is correct inside the virtual environment by running:

```shell script
python --version
```

This command should output version 3.7.x.

### 4. Install RIF Lumino requirements in your environment

Inside the virtual environment run the following command (this could take a few minutes):

```shell script
pip install -r requirements.txt -c constraints.txt -e .
```

Run the Lumino setup with the following command:

```shell script
python setup.py develop
```

> ## Start RIF Communications transport layer

Author: Apply all the changes of the macOS one (copy paste)

Reviewer 2: i don't understand what you mean by this comment, could you please elaborate on it? thanks

> The comunication between Lumino nodes can be done both using RIF Communications (https://www.rifos.org/communications) and Matrix (https://matrix.org/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The communication between Lumino nodes can be done both using RIF Communications (https://www.rifos.org/communications) and Matrix (https://matrix.org/).
```

> The default way, and the one we encourage to use for a more decentralized ecosystem, is RIF Communications. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default way, and the one encouraged to be used for a more decentralized ecosystem, is RIF Communications. 
```

> In order to run Lumino using RIF Comms, you need to set up the RIF Communications bootnode. To use Matrix, no configuration is required. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to run Lumino using RIF Comms, you need to set up the RIF Communications node. To use Matrix, no configuration is required. 
```

i know that the project is actually called _bootnode_ but i think the `boot` part is confusing. i would just call this a rif comms node.

not a blocker

> ### Set up a RIF Communications bootnode

Reviewer 2: so, i agree on a comment you made elsewhere, about this being moved to the rif comms repo and then just linked from here.

i would replace everything between this line and line `179` with 2 links, something like:

```markdown
### Set up a RIF Communications node
Please follow the instructions in the (RIF Communcations installation page)[link here].

### Start the RIF Communications node
Please follow the instructions in the (RIF Communcations execution page)[link here].
```

Author: agree, lets wait for the rif comms docs

#### Requirements:

> - Node 14+ (14.13 recommended)

Reviewer 2: @mauricioirace can you confirm whether we recommend `14.13` or `14.15`?

Reviewer: 14.15.4 is the one in production, so I'd go for 14.15. (anyway both works fine)

#### Get the code

> - git clone https://github.com/rsksmart/rif-communications-pubsub-bootnode/tree/grpc-api 
> - run npm install 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Download the code by executing `git clone https://github.com/rsksmart/rif-communications-pubsub-bootnode -b grpc-api`.

After this, run `npm install` inside the cloned folder.
```

#### Create a key for the RIF Communications bootnode

- Create the `config/keys/lumino` folder

> - execute `openssl ecparam -genkey -name secp256k1 -out ec_key.pem -param_enc explicit` and then `openssl pkcs8 -in ec_key.pem -topk8 -v2 aes-256-cbc -v2prf hmacWithSHA256 -outform DER -out ec_key_pkcs8_v2.der` and define a password

Reviewer 2: i can't suggest nested backticks, so i am writing here what i would change this to:

1. Create the `config/keys/lumino` folder.
2. Execute the following commands inside this folder: 

```
openssl ecparam -genkey -name secp256k1 -out ec_key.pem -param_enc explicit
``` 
and then 

```
openssl pkcs8 -in ec_key.pem -topk8 -v2 aes-256-cbc -v2prf hmacWithSHA256 -outform DER -out ec_key_pkcs8_v2.der
``` 
The latter one will require you to define a password.

Author: like it, modified.

#### Create a config file

> - go back to `config` folder
> - edit the `lumino.json5` file. modify the `key.password` value to your key's password
> - change the `key.privateKeyURLPath` to the config key path `[...]/config/keys/lumino/ec_key_pkcs8_v2.der`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Go back to the `config` folder
2. Edit the `lumino.json5` file: 
    1. change the `key.password` value to your key's password
    2. change the `key.privateKeyURLPath` to the config key path `[...]/config/keys/lumino/ec_key_pkcs8_v2.der`
```

#### Start the node

> - At root folder, run `NODE_ENV=lumino npm run api-server`
> - You should see that the GRPC Api started on port `5013` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At the project root folder, run `NODE_ENV=lumino npm run api-server`.

You should see a message indicating that the GRPC API was started on port `5013`.
```

## Start your RIF Lumino Node

1. Go to `$RIF_LUMINO_PATH`.
2. If you haven't executed it before, run `source clientEnv/bin/activate` to activate the virtual environment.
3. Run the following command to start Lumino:
    
    ```shell script
    lumino
        --keystore-path $KEYSTORE_PATH
        --network-id 33
        --eth-rpc-endpoint $RSK_NODE_URL
        --environment-type development
        --tokennetwork-registry-contract-address $TOKENNETWORK_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS
        --secret-registry-contract-address $SECRET_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS
        --endpoint-registry-contract-address $ENDPOINT_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS
        --no-sync-check
        --api-address 127.0.0.1:5001
        --rnsdomain $YOUR_RNS_DOMAIN
        --discoverable # if this flag is present, then your node will be registered on Lumino Explorer
        --hub-mode # if this flag is present, then your node will run in HUB mode

>         --transport # transport mode

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        --transport
```

(i think we should either have this comment be more explicatory, or remove it altogether, and we already have an explanation down below)

    | `environment-type`                        | You will need this set to `development` in order to use custom blockchain and contract addresses.                                       |
    | `$TOKENNETWORK_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS` | Address for the token registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                                |
    | `$SECRET_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS`       | Address for the secret registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                               |
    | `$ENDPOINT_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS`     | Address for the endpoint registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                             |
    | `no-sync-check`                           | This will allow you to bypass checking that the node is synchronized against etherscan.                                                 |
    | `$YOUR_RNS_DOMAIN`                        | You can supply the RNS address associated with your RSK node address, e.g. `--rnsdomain=lumino.rsk.co`                                 |

>     | `transport`                               | Transport mode for Lumino, rif-comms and matrix are supported. Defaults to rif-comms, e.g. `--transport=matrix`                                 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    | `transport`                               | Transport mode for Lumino. Supported values are `rif-comms` and `matrix`. Example of use: `--transport=matrix`. Defaults to `rif-comms`. |
```

```shell script
which python3
```

### 3. Activate the environment
Activate the python virtual environment by executing the following command:

```shell script
source clientEnv/bin/activate
```

Check if the Python version is correct inside the virtual environment by running:

```shell script
python --version
```

This command should output version 3.7.x.

### 4. Install RIF Lumino requirements in your environment

Inside the virtual environment run the following command (this could take a few minutes):

```shell script
pip install -r requirements.txt -c constraints.txt -e .
```

Run the Lumino setup with the following command:

```shell script
python setup.py develop
```

## Start RIF Communications transport layer

The communication between Lumino nodes can be done both using RIF Communications (https://www.rifos.org/communications) and Matrix (https://matrix.org/).

The default way, and the one encouraged to be used for a more decentralized ecosystem, is RIF Communications. 

In order to run Lumino using RIF Comms, you need to set up the RIF Communications node. To use Matrix, no configuration is required. 

### Set up a RIF Communications bootnode

> #### Requirements:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Requirements
```

- Node 14+ (14.13 recommended)

#### Get the code

Download the code by executing `git clone https://github.com/rsksmart/rif-communications-pubsub-bootnode -b grpc-api`.

After this, run `npm install` inside the cloned folder.

#### Create a key for the RIF Communications bootnode

1. Create the `config/keys/lumino` folder.
2. Execute the following commands inside this folder: 

```
openssl ecparam -genkey -name secp256k1 -out ec_key.pem -param_enc explicit
``` 
and then 

```
openssl pkcs8 -in ec_key.pem -topk8 -v2 aes-256-cbc -v2prf hmacWithSHA256 -outform DER -out ec_key_pkcs8_v2.der
``` 
The latter one will require you to define a password.

#### Create a config file

> - go back to `config` folder
> - edit the `lumino.json5` file. Modify the `key.password` value to your key's password
> - change the `key.privateKeyURLPath` to the config key path `[...]/config/keys/lumino/ec_key_pkcs8_v2.der`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Go back to the `config` folder
2. Edit the `lumino.json5` file:
    1. Modify the `key.password` value to your key's password
    2. Change the `key.privateKeyURLPath` to the config key path `[...]/config/keys/lumino/ec_key_pkcs8_v2.der`
```

/ip4/127.0.0.1/tcp/5012/ws/p2p/16Uiu2HAmQswXYkmzDTgs2Em5JkhP8Y33CEhXQUHY3trctB1StTe7

Listening on topics: 

PEERID: 16Uiu2HAmQswXYkmzDTgs2Em5JkhP8Y33CEhXQUHY3trctB1StTe7
GRPC Server started on port 5013
```

## Start your RIF Lumino Node

1. Go to `$RIF_LUMINO_PATH`.
2. If you haven't executed it before, run `source clientEnv/bin/activate` to activate the virtual environment.
3. Run the following command to start Lumino:
    
    ```shell script
    lumino
        --keystore-path $KEYSTORE_PATH
        --network-id 33
        --eth-rpc-endpoint $RSK_NODE_URL
        --environment-type development
        --tokennetwork-registry-contract-address $TOKENNETWORK_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS
        --secret-registry-contract-address $SECRET_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS
        --endpoint-registry-contract-address $ENDPOINT_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS
        --no-sync-check
        --api-address 127.0.0.1:5001
        --rnsdomain $YOUR_RNS_DOMAIN
        --discoverable # if this flag is present, then your node will be registered on Lumino Explorer
        --hub-mode # if this flag is present, then your node will run in HUB mode

>         --transport
>         --grpc-endpoint # grpc endpoint of RIF Communications node  
>    
>     ```
>     
>     | FIELD                                     | DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                             |
>     |-------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
>     | `$KEYSTORE_PATH`                          | The path to your keystore folder.                                                                                                       |
>     | `network-id`                              | The blockchain network ID you're connecting to. This must match the RSK node you're connecting to. `33` is regtest.                     |
>     | `$RSK_NODE_URL`                           | URL of the RSK node to connect to (`http://URL:PORT`). If you're running a local node, this will typically be `http://localhost:4444/`. |
>     | `environment-type`                        | You will need this set to `development` in order to use custom blockchain and contract addresses.                                       |
>     | `$TOKENNETWORK_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS` | Address for the token registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                                |
>     | `$SECRET_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS`       | Address for the secret registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                               |
>     | `$ENDPOINT_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS`     | Address for the endpoint registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                             |
>     | `no-sync-check`                           | This will allow you to bypass checking that the node is synchronized against etherscan.                                                 |
>     | `$YOUR_RNS_DOMAIN`                        | You can supply the RNS address associated with your RSK node address, e.g. `--rnsdomain=lumino.rsk.co`                                 |
>     | `transport`                               | Transport mode for Lumino. Supported values are `rif-comms` and `matrix`. Example of use: `--transport=matrix`. Defaults to `rif-comms`. |
>     | `grpc-endpoint` | The communication endpoint for the RIF Comms node used for transport purposes. Note that the `transport` flag must be set to `rif-comms` (explicitly or by default) for this parameter to be used. Defaults to `"localhost:5013"`. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        --transport $TRANSPORT_MODE
        --grpc-endpoint $GRPC_ENDPOINT
   
    ```
    
    | FIELD                                     | DESCRIPTION                                                                                                                              |
    |-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
    | `$KEYSTORE_PATH`                          | The path to your keystore folder.                                                                                                        |
    | `network-id`                              | The blockchain network ID you're connecting to. This must match the RSK node you're connecting to. `33` is regtest.                      |
    | `$RSK_NODE_URL`                           | URL of the RSK node to connect to (`http://URL:PORT`). If you're running a local node, this will typically be `http://localhost:4444/`.  |
    | `environment-type`                        | You will need this set to `development` in order to use custom blockchain and contract addresses.                                        |
    | `$TOKENNETWORK_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS` | Address for the token registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                                 |
    | `$SECRET_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS`       | Address for the secret registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                                |
    | `$ENDPOINT_REGISTRY_CONTRACT_ADDRESS`     | Address for the endpoint registry contract deployed (view contracts table).                                                              |
    | `no-sync-check`                           | This will allow you to bypass checking that the node is synchronized against etherscan.                                                  |
    | `$YOUR_RNS_DOMAIN`                        | You can supply the RNS address associated with your RSK node address, e.g. `--rnsdomain=lumino.rsk.co`                                   |
    | `$TRANSPORT_MODE`                         | Transport mode for Lumino. Supported values are `rif-comms` and `matrix`. Example of use: `--transport=matrix`. Defaults to `rif-comms`. |
    | `$GRPC_ENDPOINT`                          | The communication endpoint for the RIF Comms node used for transport purposes. Note that the `transport` flag must be set to `rif-comms` (explicitly or by default) for this parameter to be used. Defaults to `"localhost:5013"`.                                                                                                                                  |
```

(i think this is more correct, but it's essentially the same info)
